
===== PAGE 262 =====
10
Testing and Fine-Tuning Your
Data
The previous chapter explained how to build your suite of financial reports. One of the
foundations of that chapter was the importance of making sure your data is correct. This
chapter describes a core skill of a good data analyst: testing and fine-tuning your data, which
can be difficult and time-consuming. Why is that?
Data from financial systems is complex, and it's often the case that the data you see onscreen
has been manipulated, filtered, and calculated to provide the result based on data within the
database.
Data tables from finance applications are complicated. For example, they'll include voided and
cancelled transactions, so straight sums of data will also include everything. Ensuring your
data is correct is an essential task that'll become an ever-present skill throughout your time
developing Power BI reports. Reports that were correct one day can be incorrect the next, and
understanding this and how to fix it will serve you well.
In this chapter, we'll look at some common methods to check data accuracy, how to reconcile
that data back to the source at a transaction level, and techniques to deal with differences in
that reconciliation. Finally, we'll take a look at why cleansing data within Power Query and
Power BI is a bad idea, what to do instead, and when there might be no choice but to do so.
By the end of this chapter, you will do the following:
Understand how to get accurate data in your Power BI reports
Grasp how the trial balance from Chapter 3, Creating a Trial Balance and Income
Statement, can help you check data
• 
• 

===== PAGE 263 =====
Learn how to create a transaction-level reconciliation
Appreciate the dangers of cleansing data within Power Query and Power BI
Technical requirements
To view the example that goes with this chapter, you will need an internet-connected device
and access to Microsoft Excel. In this book's GitHub repository, there is an example of a test
script that you can use to help you methodically test your reports: https://github.com/
PacktPublishing/Financial-Modeling-with-Power-BI_Packt/tree/main/Chapter10.
What is incorrect data?
What does correct or incorrect mean anyway, and why is data "incorrect"?
Let's begin 
idx_4bc7e96dwith the idea that your application isn't generating "incorrect" data. It's generating
data you don't need for reporting, so you need to filter it out.
You need a starting point to find out what you need to filter out. We generally judge reporting
to be correct or incorrect based on a comparison to transactions and reports generated directly
from the source system, and we will ask users for copies of those reports. With this, we have a
good idea of where we're heading.
This asks why there's a difference between the data you've extracted directly from the database
of your financial application and the reports run directly from the same financial application.
The reason, generally, is that postings exist in the database that you don't see in the reports
from the financial application. A common example is a cancelled or void transaction.
Transactions are often cancelled or voided due to user error or a supplier/customer change.
When this happens, you won't see the transaction in the application or within reporting, as it's
considered reversed or even deleted. But, apart from rare circumstances, those transactions are
still recorded on the database with a status of cancelled or similar; they're just filtered out
when reports are run.
When you extract 
idx_8b0019b3data from the database, you'll see those transactions and likely many more.
Build a simple SUM measure on the Amount field, and those transactions will be included, and
your SUM will be incorrect.
Date/time fields are another common reason for incorrect data when compared to your finance
application. Transactions often have many dates; a sales order can have dates for initial order
entry, delivery, customer request, and financial posting. Pick the wrong date, and transactions
will fall into different periods from the finance application and will be considered incorrect.
We've seen time zone issues place transactions into different periods because of a single hour.
It happens more frequently than you may think.
• 
• 
Chapter 10
234

===== PAGE 264 =====
The first part of this chapter is to understand that the data extracted from the source is likely to
be incorrect when compared to a system report. In fact, we expect it to be incorrect and have to
work on it to match the system report. If you start with that expectation, you'll be ready for
anything. To begin, we'll move on to some common techniques to test and fine-tune your data.
Using the trial balance to test your data
In Chapter 3, Creating a Trial Balance and Income Statement, we created a basic trial balance,
which is a 
idx_426b9cc4great starting point to check your data model. The first and simplest approach to
testing the data integrity of our reports is to compare the trial balance we created with the trial
balance from the source system. But even before we get that far, there are a number of checks
we can quickly carry out on our Power BI trial balance:
Is the total zero?
On the rows of the trial balance, does Opening Balance – Total Credit + Total Debit = 
Closing Balance?
Do the columns total correctly?
If the answer 
idx_c9ca63cdto any of these is no, then there is a problem either with the semantic model or
with one of the calculations.
Common checks for the trial balance
The first check is the structure of the semantic model. Start with the GL Transactions table
and trace 
idx_a3299689the related tables. Make sure every relationship has the cardinality you expect. In
general, the relationship from Chart of Account to GL Transactions and Calendar to 
Transactions should both be one-to-many. There will be one GL account on the Chart of 
Account table for many accounts on the GL Transactions table. If you have a many-to-many
relationship, you've got duplicated data in the Chart of Account table, or you've linked the
wrong fields. If you've linked the correct fields but have a many-to-many relationship, you
probably have duplicated values in your Chart of Account table and need to ensure you only
have unique values using Power Query. If you've connected the wrong fields, use the Manage
Relationships function in the model view to link the correct fields.
Another common issue you may have to check is how positive and negative numbers are
imported, and whether the sign is correct. For example, if your revenue is imported as a
positive, you'll need to correct that in Power Query.
The next step is to work through the calculations to make sure they're correct. Spelling errors
in the filter of a CALCULATE statement will stop the measure from calculating the desired result.
1. 
2. 
3. 
235
Testing and Fine-Tuning Your Data

===== PAGE 265 =====
Here's an example from Chapter 4, Common DAX measures. The first DAX statement is correct,
the second is incorrect:
Total Revenue = CALCULATE(
    [Total amount],
FILTER(
'Chart of Account',
'Chart of Account' [AccountCategory]="SALES" ||
'Chart of Account' [AccountCategory]="OTHERINC"
    )
)*-1
Total Revenue = CALCULATE(
    [Total amount],
FILTER(
'Chart of Account',
'Chart of Account' [AccountCategory]="SALE" ||
'Chart of Account' [AccountCategory]="OTHER1NC"
    )
)*-1
Although the 
idx_198afbf5changes are minor spelling errors, the second statement will return zero as 
"SALES" and "OTHERINC" are incorrect. DAX and M are precise, and the most innocuous error
will return an error or zero.
Finding these errors can be time-consuming since the calculations are likely to be detailed.
Most commonly, the problems in calculations will relate to a sign or a filter.
To help locate calculation errors, create a table in the canvas view and add the measures. If any
rows equal zero, you've probably found your error.
If you are confident that the semantic model is correct and there are no calculation errors, that
leaves two broad possibilities:
There is an error in the data transformation from Power Query
There is an error in the source system
The most likely problem is an issue with the data load. This is especially true if the data doesn't
come directly from the source (e.g., your semantic model is working from a system report that
has been output to Excel) or if you're performing transformations during the Power Query data
load. In the latter case, start by making a copy of the semantic model and, in Power Query,
remove the transformations one by one and check the effect on the data. Remember, Power
Query transformations are applied from top to bottom, and it's often the case that the order is
1. 
2. 
Chapter 10
236

===== PAGE 266 =====
incorrect. If the trial balance now balances, you've proved the issue is in the transformation,
and you can fix it.
If the transformations are good, the next step is to ensure that the source data is correct – if
your data is 
idx_8fd6345asourced via an Excel export, check if the spreadsheet has the correct, latest data,
that the format is correct, and that you're not hitting the row limit for the sheet. Using an out-
of-date spreadsheet is also a very common error.
If those things are fine, check whether there's an issue with the trial balance in the source
system. This would be an exceptionally rare occurrence, and an error in the trial balance in
Power BI is almost always something that arises either in the data model or in the
transformation steps. If the source system's trial balance still doesn't match yours, there's an
error you've missed, so you'll need to restart the troubleshooting process.
The trial balance adds up, so we're done, right?
Generally, no. All we've done so far is verify the internal consistency of the semantic model.
While that's important and a necessary minimum step, it's only the first step to prove that our
data model is correct. As we've previously mentioned, the data in our model must match the
data in our source systems.
The next step is to check the subtotals from the trial balance. If the source and Power BI don't
match, there is a problem. If they do, look at whether the two reports match at an account
level.
Depending on the size of your chart of accounts, you may choose to reconcile every account,
checking the opening balance, debit, credit, and closing balance for each one. More likely, you
will have a large chart of accounts, and you may not reconcile to that level. In this case, the
approach to take is to reconcile a sample of accounts, rather than all of them. The rationale is
that if a sample of accounts is correct, and the model is internally consistent, there's little space
for errors.
When choosing 
idx_d168fff0accounts to check, you should aim for at least 10% coverage of the overall set of
accounts. The accounts should also be representative of your main business processes, spread
across the balance sheet and P&L, and indicate whether the expected transaction is a credit or
debit.
237
Testing and Fine-Tuning Your Data

===== PAGE 267 =====
Applying this, you might choose some accounts to test, such as the following:
AR Control account
Tax Payable Control account
An Inventory account
A Revenue account
A COGS account
Another cost account
This will cover different transaction types, different business processes, and different parts of
the chart of accounts. Obviously, if you have more than 60 accounts or you have more business
processes, such as manufacturing, you'll need to expand that list.
If everything matches at this stage, we can be reasonably assured the data is correct. If not, the
next step is to look at a transaction-level reconciliation.
Creating a transaction-level reconciliation
Typically, transaction-level 
idx_3dfc93b6reconciliation is required when a higher-level reconciliation has
failed. The implication is that something is wrong with the data flow, and only a detailed
examination of the individual transactions will allow for diagnosing the problem. The most
common tool for this reconciliation is Excel.
Before you start
Consider whether you need to download all transactions. Can you, for example, identify a
single account 
idx_3d6ca71ewhere the issue is occurring? Alternatively, is the issue in a single month? If
that's the case, then you only need to export the subset that's exhibiting a problem. Whatever
the case, unless your dataset is very small, it's sensible to start by downloading a subset of the
data and reconciling first, as this is often enough to identify a systematic issue, and it's faster to
deal with small datasets than large ones.
What to do
To carry out a line-level reconciliation, you need datasets from your accounting system and
from your 
idx_6006a135Power BI model that have the same columns. It's also important to avoid additional
manipulation of the data when downloading it from Power BI, since this creates an
opportunity for new errors to enter the system and obfuscate the issue you're trying to
diagnose. How you export the data from your source system to reconcile to the Power BI data
will depend on the exact accounting system you are using, but almost all modern accounting
systems offer some means of exporting data into Excel. Once you have this, you need a dataset
from your Power BI model to match it. For the purposes of demonstration, we'll assume the
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Chapter 10
238

===== PAGE 268 =====
download from the source system contains the following columns, so we'll generate a table in
Power BI with identical columns as the basis for a data extract:
Transaction ID
Account number
Date
Amount
We'll now create a new page in our report and create a simple table containing these columns:
Figure 10.1 – Table showing transactions
It's important 
idx_195650fdto double-check the settings on the fields. In our example, Power BI has
defaulted to counting TransactionID, which is not useful, so we need to set this to Don't 
summarize:
• 
• 
• 
• 
239
Testing and Fine-Tuning Your Data

===== PAGE 269 =====
Figure 10.2 – Dropdown of column settings and options
Now that we have the table in the desired format, we can export the data for our reconciliation 
idx_4fb9b6acby clicking the ellipsis on the table and choosing Export data:
Chapter 10
240

===== PAGE 270 =====
Figure 10.3 – Dropdown of options from the table visual
This will download the data from this table as a CSV that can be interrogated in Excel.
Remember, Power BI Desktop limits CSV export to 30,000 rows. If you need to export more
data, publish the report to the Power BI service, where you can export up to 150,000 rows. We
should add that a 30,000-row reconciliation is beyond anything we'd recommend.
What to do, and what to look out for
First, start by checking the row counts – assuming the two datasets have the same scope, then
the row counts 
idx_0752807ashould match. If they don't, you know the Power BI report is getting either
more or less data than expected (usually less, but if there is an issue relating to dates and date
formatting, it may show more because the data is being assigned to the wrong dates).
The next step 
idx_4ab96023is to match the two datasets by TransactionID, the unique ID for each
transaction. You can do this by creating a relationship between the two tables in Power BI and
building a table with the transaction IDs side by side. If transactions in the Power BI table are
241
Testing and Fine-Tuning Your Data

===== PAGE 271 =====
either missing or you have extra, identify the culprits and start to look at why this might be
occurring. The most likely root causes are as follows:
Errors in the Power Query steps while importing the data
Errors in the configuration of the export mechanism from the source
The most common Power Query error is to filter out rows that you don't intend to filter out.
If both datasets contain the same transactions, the next thing to look at is matching the details.
Check the account numbers, dates, and amounts. The most common issues here are the
following:
Mis-matching amounts due to rounding
Issues with date formats
This list is, of course, not exhaustive, but date issues are very common, especially when
working across systems configured for the common date formats in different countries (e.g.,
MM/DD/YYYY in the US, and DD/MM/YYYY, common across Europe). Most of these issues can
typically be addressed by making changes in the Power Query steps that import the data in the
first place. Issues are common in a single country with multiple time zones, such as the United
States. We've seen instances where transactions in Power BI were placed in a different financial
year due to an incorrect time zone conversion.
Assuming you've created the table using the "raw" column from the table, meaning no
measures or calculated columns, this points to one of two possible issues. Either there's an
issue in the measures that have gone into the trial balance, or there is a problem with the
source system. Again, the latter option is highly unlikely, but not impossible.
While the sort 
idx_69f03e4dof error that would cause 
idx_5d9edbd8reconciliation issues from the source system is
exceptionally rare, it's likely that any reconciliation will highlight data quality issues. So, if we
find those, what do we do about them?
This takes us to the next section, where we discuss data cleansing in Power Query and Power
BI.
Cleansing data in Power Query and Power BI
By cleansing data in Power Query and Power BI, we mean changes to fix data quality issues,
either while 
idx_80e3563dimporting data into the reporting system or creating calculations that remove
certain data quality issues. In many ways, this should be the shortest section 
idx_2518d932in the book: don't
do it, as it generally causes more problems than it solves. Our advice is to fix data issues in the
source system, not Power Query or Power BI. That said, there is value in a discussion of why it's
a bad practice, and when it can be done acceptably.
• 
• 
• 
• 
Chapter 10
242

===== PAGE 272 =====
Let's first 
idx_81537fa6consider why it's a bad practice. First and foremost, cleansing data in Power Query /
Power BI means creating data that's different from the source 
idx_0a79d555system, which is a fundamental
data integrity issue, raising the question of how you test it. Moreover, there needs to be
consideration given to how to document the changes so future users aren't confused by the
difference between the source system and Power BI.
The next problem in fixing the data in Power Query / Power BI is removing the incentive to fix
the data at the source. We can also say with confidence that once you've fixed source data in
Power Query / Power BI, you'll be asked to do it again and again.
Looking further into the future, what happens if there's a need to change the reporting system?
That'll require a major clean-up of the historical data, or the new implementation needs to
replicate the cleansing that has been done.
So, now you 
idx_96123559know why this is a bad idea. What do you do when there's 
idx_0bc7c9f5no choice? First of all,
this should be seen as a Band-Aid, a temporary 
idx_571ed4e7measure that needs to be communicated 
idx_7d743322to
stakeholders. Another term we might use is technical debt. Like any other debt, when we incur
it, we need a repayment plan. In this case, by fixing the source data and removing the cleansing
from the reports.
Non-functional testing
So far, our tests 
idx_8c115817have been concentrated on whether or not the data is correct, or "functional"
testing, as it is also known. Almost as important, although often neglected, is non-functional
testing.
Non-functional testing refers to the aspects of a report outside the calculations and measures
used within the report and looks to examine aspects such as load times, security, and
adherence to design standards.
We've already touched on some of these ideas – two in particular, in the form of responsiveness
and accessibility. Let's start with responsiveness.
One of the problems of non-functional tests is that they're often subjective. Let's start with
how long is too long for a visual to refresh.
As a general rule of thumb, if you're hitting 3 seconds for all the visuals on a page to update
after a control is clicked or a slicer is updated, that's too long. For some edge cases and complex
scenarios, more time may be allowed, but in general, anything slower than 3 seconds becomes
a frustration to the user. This will lead to a perception by the user that the report is slow and, in
turn, lead to them seeking other avenues to get the data they need. You'll possibly see low
usage of the reporting suite as a result.
243
Testing and Fine-Tuning Your Data

===== PAGE 273 =====
The next item is accessibility. Some elements of this are more objective than others and
sometimes need to be tailored to your specific user base.
In general, you should 
idx_9803af1econsider how a report works for people with reduced vision or impaired
color vision. Make sure font sizes are large enough, try not to go below 12 point, and only below
10 point if the information conveyed is not critical. Also, think about contrast; there are online
tools that can check the contrast ratios between different colors. Similarly, there are tools that
you can use to ensure color palettes are readable for those with impaired color vision.
Accessibility is different between users, so focus on specific users and work with them to
ensure the report is legible.
Visual clutter is also an accessibility issue. We discussed this in Chapter 9, Creating a Suite of
Financial Reports, when talking about good design, and this should be covered in the testing
phase of the project, not simply be assumed to be done.
Another non-functional test you should consider is the refresh time of the dataset. This may be
less obvious than the tests we have discussed so far, but it can be just as important. If a report
takes too long to refresh, then the data may not be up to date when the end user needs it.
This depends a lot on the needs of the organization, and in finance reporting, an overnight
refresh is generally enough, where you have many hours for that to run. That said, the longer
the refresh takes to run, the higher the chance of a timeout, so make sure the refresh is fast and
efficient. Again, as a rule of thumb, for an overnight refresh, a 1-hour refresh would be
considered slow.
The final main non-function test to consider is security – is the report accessible only to those
users who are authorized to see it? To do this, there are a number of approaches, either by
working with 
idx_8d407d52trusted users to see if they can access a restricted report or restricted data if
you're using row-level security.
Having completed both functional and non-functional testing, we can be reasonably assured
that the report is ready for release to end users.
A detailed treatment of how to handle poor report performance is beyond the scope of
this book, but we would recommend you check out this book:
https://www.packtpub.com/en-gb/product/microsoft-power-bi-performance-
best-practices-9781801071390
Tip
Chapter 10
244

===== PAGE 274 =====
Summary
In this chapter, we covered some common methods for testing and fine-tuning your data. This
is an important topic and a set of skills we'd encourage anyone working with data to become
proficient in. If something doesn't calculate correctly, you'll need to find out why. This is work
that demands patience and time, and a task you'll improve at over time, as you become better
at spotting the issues and develop your own methods for fixing them.
Don't forget the importance of non-functional testing by making sure your test plans include
both functional and non-functional tests. A perfectly calculated report that takes minutes to
load will likely not be used.
In the next chapter, we move on to a very different topic, although another important one in
the world of financial reporting. That is, paginated reports.
Get this book's PDF version and more
Scan the QR code (or go to https://www.packtpub.com/unlock). Search for this book by name,
confirm the edition, and then follow the steps on the page.
Note: Keep your invoice handy. Purchases made directly from Packt don't require an invoice.
245
Testing and Fine-Tuning Your Data

===== PAGE 275 =====
